(1A) In Sanskrit: Ārya-pratyutpanna-buddha-saṃmukha-avasthita-samādhi-nāma-mahāyāna-sūtra. In Tibetan: The Holy Mahayana Sutra called the Samadhi of Direct Encounter with the Buddhas of the Present.
BAMPO ONE [T.418: Chapter One, The Enquiry; T.416: Chapter One, Meditation]
On the one occasion when I heard the following the Lord was staying at Rājagṛha, in the Haunt of the Kalandakas in the Bamboo Wood, together with a great assembly of five hundred all of whom were arhats, in whom the noxious influences (Skt. āsrava) were eliminated, who were free of the defilements (Skt. kleśa), had attained mastery, done their duty, performed their tasks, laid down their burden, obtained their own goal, destroyed the fetters of existence, whose minds were fully liberated by perfect understanding, who had attained the excellent supremacy of complete mastery over their minds, and obtained the eight emancipations--with the exception of one person, namely, the Venerable Ananda.
(1B) On that occasion the bodhisattva and mahasattva Bhadrapāla had come out from the great city of Rājagṛha and, in order to hear the Dharma, was in attendance on the Lord, along with five hundred bodhisattvas who were all householders and upholders of the five rules of training (Skt. pañca-sikṣāpada).And so it was that the bodhisattva and mahasattva Bhadrapāla, after emerging in the late afternoon from secluded meditation, went to the place where the Lord was, and having on his arrival prostrated himself at the Lord's feet and circumambulated him seven times, he sat down to one side in the Lord's presence.Those five hundred bodhisattvas too, after emerging in the late afternoon from secluded meditation, came to the place where the Lord was, and having on their arrival prostrated themselves at the Lord's feet and circumambulated the Lord seven times, they sat down to one side in the Lord's presence.
(1C) Those five hundred bhikṣus too, after emerging in the late afternoon from secluded meditation, came to the place where the Lord was, and having on their arrival prostrated themselves at the Lord's feet and circumambulated the Lord seven times, they sat down to one side in the Lord's presence.At that time also the Venerable Śāriputra and the Venerable Mahāmaudgalyāyana, after spending the rainy season in the great city of Śrāvastī, journeyed in due course through the land together with five hundred bhikṣus, and came to the great city of Rājagṛha, to the Haunt of the Kalandakas in the Bamboo Wood, to the place where the Lord was, and having on their arrival prostrated themselves at the Lord's feet and circumambulated the Lord three times, they sat down to one side in the Lord's presence.
(1D) Then at that time the Lord performed such a working of magic that all those bhikṣus staying and living in different regions came to the great city of Rājagṛha, to the Haunt of the Kalandakas in the Bamboo Wood, to the place where the Lord was, and having on their arrival prostrated themselves at the Lord's feet and circumambulated the Lord three times, they sat down to one side in the Lord's presence, such was the working of magic that he performed.And so at that time there were one hundred thousand bhikṣus gathered together and seated in the Haunt of the Kalandakas in the Bamboo Wood.Then at that time the Lord performed such a working of magic that thirty thousand bhikṣuṇīs headed by Mahāprajāpatī Gautamī came to the great city of Rājagṛha, to the Haunt of the Kalandakas in the Bamboo Wood, to the place where the Lord was, and having on their arrival prostrated themselves at the Lord's feet and circumambulated the Lord seven times, they sat down to one side in the Lord's presence, such was the working of magic that he performed.
(1E) Then at that time the Lord performed such a working of magic that: the bodhisattva and mahasattva Ratnakara set out from the great city of Vaiśālī, accompanied and followed by 28,000 Licchavi youths, and came to the great city of Rājagṛha, to the Haunt of the Kalandakas in the Bamboo Wood, to the place where the Lord was, and having on his arrival prostrated himself at the Lord's feet and circumambulated him three times, he sat down to one side in the Lord's presence;the bodhisattva and mahasattva Guhagupta also set out from the great city of Campa, accompanied and followed by 28,000 beings, and came to the great city of Rājagṛha, to the Haunt of the Kalandakas in the Bamboo Wood, to the place where the Lord was, and having on his arrival prostrated himself at the Lord's feet and circumambulated the Lord three times, he sat down to one side in the Lord's presence;
(1F) the bodhisattva and mahasattva Naladatta [Naradatta?] also set out from the. great city of Vārāṇasī, accompanied and followed by 28,000 beings, and came to the great city of Rājagṛha, to the Haunt of the Kalandakas in the Bamboo Wood, to the place where the Lord was, and having on his arrival prostrated himself at the Lord's feet and circumambulated the Lord three times, he sat down to one side in the Lord's presence;the bodhisattva and mahasattva Susīma also set out from the great city of Kapilavastu, accompanied and followed by 28,000 beings, and came to the great city of Rājagṛha, to the Haunt of the Kalandakas in the Bamboo Wood, to the place where the Lord was, and having on his arrival prostrated himself at the Lord's feet and circumambulated the Lord three times, he sat down to one side in the Lord's presence;
(1G) the bodhisattva and mahasattva Mahāsusārthavāha and the householder Anāthapiṇḍada also set out from the great city of Śrāvastī, accompanied and followed by 28,000 beings, and came to the great city of Rājagṛha, to the Haunt of the Kalandakas in the Bamboo Wood, to the place where the Lord was, and having on their arrival prostrated themselves at the Lord's feet and circumambulated the Lord three times, they sat down to one side in the Lord'spresence;the bodhisattva and mahasattva Indradatta also set out from the great city of Kauśāmbī, accompanied and followed by 28,000 beings, and came to the great city of Rājagṛha, to the Haunt of the Kalandakas in the Bamboo Wood, to the place where the Lord was, and having on his arrival prostrated himself at the Lord's feet and circumambulated the Lord three times, he sat down to one side in the Lord's presence;the bodhisattva and mahasattva Varuṇadeva also set out from the great city of Sāketa, accompanied and followed by 28,000 beings, and came to the great city of Rājagṛha, to the Haunt of the Kalandakas in the Bamboo Wood, to the place where the Lord was, and having on his arrival prostrated himself at the Lord's feet and circumambulated the Lord three times, he sat down to one side in the Lord's presence;
(1H) King Ajātaśatru also set out from the great city of Rajagrha, accompanied and followed by 30,000 beings, and came to the Haunt of the Kalandakas in the Bamboo Wood, to the place where the Lord was, and having on his arrival prostrated himself at the Lord's feet and circumambulated the Lord three times, he sat down to one side in the Lord's presence;the Four Great Kings; Śakra, Lord of the devas; Brahma Sahāṃpati; and the devaputra Śrībhadra also, accompanied and followed by many hundred thousand koṭinayutas of devas, came to the place where the Lord was, and having on their arrival prostrated themselves at the Lord's feet and circumambulated the Lord three times, they sat down to one side in the Lord's presence;the devaputra Maheśvara also, accompanied and followed by many thousands of devaputras from the Realm of the Pure Abodes, came to the place where the Lord was, and having on his arrival prostrated himself at the Lord's feet and circumambulated the Lord three times, he sat down to one side in the Lord's presence;
(1I) the four asura Lords also, with many hundred thousand koṭinayutas of asuras; the nāga Kings Nanda and Upananda also, with many hundred thousand kotinayutas of nagas; the naga King Anavatapta also, with many hundred thousand kotinayutas of nagas; the naga King Manasvin also, with many hundred thousand kotinayutas of nagas; and the naga King Elapatra also, with many hundred thousand kotinayutas of nagas came to the place where the Lord was, and having on their arrival prostrated themselves at the Lord's feet and circumambulated the Lord three times, they sat down to one side; such was the working of magic that he performed.And so at that time this Trichiliomegachiliocosm (Skt. trisāhasra-mahāsāhasra-lokadhātu), in the space overhead and up to the level of the Brahmaloka, was so crowded with highly exalted devas, nāgas, yakṣas, gandharvas, asuras, garuḍas, kinnaras and mahoragas that one could not even have found enough room to insert the point of a staff.
(1J) Then the bodhisattva and mahasattva Bhadrapāla, having risen from his seat and arranged his upper garment on one shoulder, put his right knee to the ground, extended his joined palms towards the Lord, and said to the Lord:'Your Reverence, if the Lord would give me the opportunity to have the questions I ask answered, then I would question the Lord, the Tathagata, Arhat and Perfectly Awakened One, on a certain matter.'When this was said, the Lord said to the bodhisattva and mahasattva Bhadrapāla:'Bhadrapāla, question the Tathagata, Arhat and Perfectly Awakened One on whatever you wish, and by answering those questions I shall gladden your mind.
(1K) When this was said, the bodhisattva and mahasattva Bhadrapāla said to the Lord:'Lord, what samadhi is it, established in which bodhisattvas and mahasattvas (1) become those whose learning (Skt. śruti) is like the sea, who have an accumulation of learning; (2) become those who are free of doubt, free of uncertainty, and free of perplexity; (3) become those who are not deficient and not defective in supreme and perfect awakening (Skt. anuttara-samyaksaṃbodhi); (4) become those who are not reborn in any of the benighted states (Skt. akṣaṇa), and who remember their rebirths; (5) become those who, even in their dreams, are not deprived of the vision of the Tathagatas; (6) become fair of form, beautiful, handsome, and endowed with the highest excellence of splendour and beauty; (7) become those who are of high birth and noble lineage; (8) become those whose personal following is numerous, whose personal following is inseparable;
(1L) (9) become those who are endowed with understanding; (10) become those who are endowed with mindfulness (Skt. smṛti); (11) become those who are endowed with intellect; (12) become those who are endowed with glory; (13) become those who are endowed with steadfastness; (14) become those who are endowed with magic power (Skt. ṛddhi); (15) become those who are endowed with wisdom (Skt. prajñā); (16) become those who are endowed with merit; (17) become those who are endowed with modesty and bashfulness; (18) become those who have eradicated pride; (19) become those who are dwellers in friendliness (Skt. maitrī); (20) become those who are endowed with cognition (Skt. jñāna); (21) become those who are endowed with intelligence; (22) become those who are endowed with vigour (Skt. vīrya); (23) become those who are intrepid;
(1M) (24) become pursuers of the profitable (Skt. artha); (25) become pursuers of Dharma; (26) become pursuers of quietude (Skt. śamatha); (27) become pursuers of insight (Skt. vipaśyanā); (28) become pursuers of trance (Skt. dhyāna); (29) become pursuers of samādhi; (30) become pursuers of wisdom (Skt. prajñā); (31) become those who are neither frightened nor afraid nor fearful of the dharmas of emptiness (Skt. śūnyatā), signlessness (Skt. animitta) and wishlessness (Skt. apraṇihita); (32) become those who, far from falling into perdition, are keepers of the Dharma and great preachers of the Dharma (Skt. dharma-bhāṇaka); (33) become those who are born in whatever Buddha-field (Skt. buddha-kṣetra) they wish to be born in, and are not captured by any of the schools of the sectarians (Skt. tīrthika);
(1N) (34) become those who are endowed with the power (Skt. bala) of causes (Skt. hetu) but not endowed with the power of conditions (Skt. pratyaya); (35) become those who are endowed with the power of intent (Skt. āśaya); (36) become those who are endowed with the power of application (Skt. prayoga); (37) become those who are endowed with the power of the faculties (Skt. indriya); (38) become those who are endowed with the power of the objects of sense (Skt. ālambana?); (39) become those who are endowed with the power of profound thought; (40) become those who are endowed with the power of quietude (Skt. śamatha); (41) become those who are endowed with the power of insight (Skt. vipaśyanā);29 (42) become those who are endowed with the power of conviction (Skt. adhimukti); (43) become those who are endowed with the power of vows (Skt. praṇidhāna);
(1O) (44) become those of inexhaustible intent (Skt. āśaya); (45) become those who resemble the watery expanse of the ocean, in that their learning (Skt. śruti) is like the ocean; (46) become those who are like the moon in their perfection of the pure white dharmas; (47) become those who are like the sun in dispelling the darkness of ignorance; (48) become those who are like lamps in shedding light; (49) become those who are like the sky in being unobstructed; (50) become those who are free of fixation, in that their thoughts resemble space (Skt. ākāśa); (51) become those who are like vajra in their penetration of all dharmas; (52) become those who are like mountains in the steadiness of their might; (S3) become those who are characterised by steadiness because of their imperturbability; (54) become those who are like threshold-stones because of their steadfastness;
(1P) (55) become those who are like catskin-bags in their mental flexibility; (56) become those who are untrammelled by going wherever they wish like a bird; (57) become those whose pride is destroyed, like the son of an outcaste (Skt. caṇḍāla); (58) become those who enjoy the forest (Skt. araṇya) like wild animals and monkeys, and take no pleasure in villages, cities, market-towns, royal cities, and royal capitals; (59) become those who are unsullied, through consorting neither with householders nor with renunciants; (60) become those who convoke gatherings and then teach them; (61) become those who cannot be shaken by any beings; (62) become those whom all Māras find difficult to subdue; (63) become obtainers of the special knowledges (Skt. pratisaṃvid) through their certainty with regard to all dharmas; (64) become those who cannot be led astray by others with regard to all the Buddha-dharrnas;
(1Q) (65) become those who are insuperable and are of steadfast intent through the imperturbability of their great friendliness (Skt. maitrī); (66) become those who are of profound resolve (Skt. adhyāśaya) in that their practice lies in non-objectification (Skt. anupalambha, etc.) and they have the ineffable as their sphere of activity; (67) become those who are fully conscientious and are of agreeable intent through rejoicing in the impact (Skt.vega) of Dharma; (68) become those of broad resolve through performing acts of worship and veneration to all Buddhas; (69) become those whose resolve is diverse through their having created diverse wholesome potentialities (Skt. kuśala-mūla); (70) become those who are of good resolve through the purity of their [moral] adornment; (71) become those of virtuous intent through their rejection of the faults of falsehood and anger; (72) become those who are of pure resolve through obtaining the radiance of omniscient cognition (Skt. sarvajña-jñāna); (73) become those who are of cheerful resolve through embracing extensive wisdom and having thoughts which are pure and devoid of harshness; (74) become those who have the resolve to take part in the grand display through the purity of their adornment of all world-systems (Skt. lokadhatu);
(1R) (75) become those who are pure in morality (Skt. śīla) by being free of the habits of thought of śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas; (76) become those who are firm in their vows through perseverence in all undertakings; (77) become those who lead all beings in the pursuit of wholesome dharmas; (78) become those who are fearless in the [pursuit of the] rules of training and the perfections (Skt. pāramitā) of all bodhisattvas; (79) become those who are unable to regress (Skt. avinivartanīya/avaivartika) in relation to all Buddhadharmas; (80) become those who are invincible to all Maras, other sectarians (Skt. tīrthika) and rival teachers; (81) become those who apply themselves to all dharmas by focussing their concentration (Skt. manasikāra) on the Buddhadharmas; (82) become those who have an apperception (Skt. saṃjña) of all the Buddhas as their father; (83) become those who are empowered (Skt. adhiṣṭhita) by all the Buddhas through the radiance engendered in all dharmas; (84) become those whose cognition is unobscured (Skt. anāvaraṇa-jñāna) through the immediate manifestation of all Buddha-dharmas;
(1S) (85) become those who are like an illusory person in their lack of conceit or misconception (Skt. manyanā) with regard to all dharmas; (86) become those who are like phantoms in having dharmas which are unproduced, do not come into existence and do not pass away; (87) become those who are dreamlike in their understanding of the three times; (88) become those who are like reflections in manifesting their own bodies in all world-systems (Skt. lokadhātu); (89) become like echoes in possessing the dharma which neither passes on nor abides, yet is unlocalised; (90) become those who are like shadows in all their deaths and births; (91) become those who abide in the cognition of non-existence by eliminating the apperception of existents (Skt. bhāva-saṃjñā?); (92) become those who apply themselves to the dharma of marklessness (Skt. alakṣaṇa) by the habitual absence of duality; (93) become those whose aspiration to awakening (Skt. bodhicitta) is so measureless that the dharma-realm (Skt. dharma-dhātu) is their ultimate end; (94) become those who are unshakeable in all world-systems through the unshakeability of their mental processes; (95) become those whose sphere of activity is unattached in all Buddha-fields;
(1T) (96) become those who have entered the gate of dhāraṇī through proficiency in the analysis of all terms pertaining to the Dharma; (97) become those who are vessels of the Dharma through being vessels of all Buddhadharmas; (98) become those who are empowered by all the Tathagatas in that they are steadfast by virtue of the majesty of the Buddha; (99) become those who are fearless in that they utter the roar of the bull and the lion; (100) become those who are unafraid through delighting all those in the world; (101) become those who are undeluded by being similar to all Buddhas; (102) become those who understand true reality (Skt. tathatā) in that they are free of doubt and unable to be led astray by others as far as all dharmas are concerned; (103) become those who are capable of answering all questions and are able to teach [throughout] the three times; (104) become those who desire the welfare of others through obtaining great compassion (Skt. karuṇā); (105) become indefatigable in teaching the Dharma;
(1U) (106) become those who persist in not forsaking all beings; (107) become those who are unshakeable through guilelessness; (108) become those who are honest in being lamps for all worlds; (109) become those who are unlimited in all the Triple World; (l10) become those who dwell in peace through the examination of mere conventional expression; (111) become those who dwell in an unsullied state through joy in the absence of attachment; (112) become those who dwell in perfect truth (Skt. bhūta-koṭi) through being characterised by non-discrimination; (l13) become those who teach the discourses of the Omniscient One by establishing all beings in the Mahayana; (l14) become those who have attained fearlessness through being free of all fear and terror; (115) become those who are expert in the allusive utterances (Skt. saṃdhābhāṣa, etc.) of the Tathagatas in all the discourses on Dharma in the siitras; (116) become those who show their faces everywhere by entering into all assemblies;
(1V) (117) become those who, in the Mahāyāna, are worshipped by all the inhabitants of the world, and who are lords of merit like the Omniscient One; (118) become those who, being worthy of the offerings of all the inhabitants of the world, possess inexhaustible good qualities; (119) become those who experience great joy and faith at the feet of the Tathagata; (120) become those who have the inspired eloquence (Skt. pratibhāna) which makes them good at asking questions about all the Buddha-dharmas; (121) become those who, by eliminating fear and anxiety in assemblies, are not fainthearted; (122) become those who are like roaring tigers in overthrowing all rival teachers; (123) become those who, in defeating all rival sects, do not violate their pledge; (124) become those who with the sanction of all the Buddhas frequently utter the Lion Roar and occupy the Lion Throne with a view to the demonstration and elegant discussion of the Dharma; (125) become those who through being aware of all entering into communication are not taught by any of the materialists; (126) become those who are preachers of the True Dharma by being established in the causes of Buddhahood; (127) become those who aspire to the Dharma by attending upon the Tathagata; (128) become those who are indefatigable in doing honour to good friends (Skt. kalyāṇā-mitra); (129) become those who in wandering throughout the ten quarters have no abode; (130) become those who take on vows (Skt. praṇidhāna), in bringing all beings to maturity;
(1W) (131) become those who, in their skill in giving repose in the most excellent of jewels, have plunged into the sea of Dharma; (132) become those who, through adorning all the world-systems in various ways, are not to be shaken from any world-systems; (133) become those who enjoy great wonder-working power through their playful employment of the wonderworking power of a Buddha ; (134) become those who need only one instant of thought for a vision of the Buddhas;
(1X) (135) become those who, through having respect for the Dharma, are filled with cognition; (136) become those who resemble space in their understanding [of it as?] similar to the Body of Dharma (Skt. dharma-kāya); (137) become those who, in ensuring that the lineage of the Buddha remains unbroken, are inspirers of bodhisattvas; (138) become those who never interrupt any of the practices of a bodhisattva; (139) become those who, being well-formed, swift, and thoroughbred, are armed with the great armour; (140) become those who are consecrated, through consecration in orrmiscience on the level (Skt. bhūmi) of a Tathagata, One with Ten Powers; (141) become those who, by knowing the method by means of computation, understand all things subject to apperception; (142) become those who, through the investigation of all modes of calculation, are familiar with all dissolution and formation; (143) become those who, through the practice of complete liberality, are neither fixated nor grasping; (144) become those who, being great masters of giving (Skt. dāna-pati) without regrets, are skilled in liberality;
(1Y) (145) become those who do not aspire to opportunities for rebirth in any of the states of being; (146) become those who see the Buddha-fields of Buddhas and Lords resident in other world-systems, and hear the Dharma, retaining it and not forgetting it, yet it is not [due to the operation of] the five extraordinary faculties (Skt. abhijñā), nor [due to the operation of] the six extraordinary faculties, nor are those bodhisattvas in those Buddha-fields after having passed away from this world-system, but those bodhisattvas, while staying in this very world-system, see the Buddhas and hear the Dharma, and retain it all, that is, just as 146 am free of any doubt or uncertainty as I stand in the Lord's presence now, so too those bodhisattvas become those who are never deprived of the sight of the Buddhas or the hearing of the Dharma, even in their dreams--what is the samadhi [which produces all these qualities and abilities]?"Chapter One of the Samadhi Enquired of by Bhadrapāla"
(2A) When this was said, the Lord said to the bodhisattva and mahāsattva Bhadrapāla:'Well done, Bhadrapāla, well done! You, Bhadrapāla, have set out for the benefit of many beings, for the happiness of many beings, out of compassion for the world, for the welfare, the benefit, and the happiness of the great body of beings, of devas and of humankind, and you have done well, Bhadrapāla, in deciding to question the Tathāgata in such a way on this matter.''You, Bhadrapāla, have done your duty and created wholesome potentialities (Skt. kuśala-mūla) under former Jinas; you have worshipped many hundred thousand koṭinayutas of Buddhas; you aspire to the Dharma; you desire the Dharma; you lead the holy life in non-objectification;you arouse bodhisattvas, delight bodhisattvas, teach bodhisattvas, inspire bodhisattvas, fill bodhisattvas with enthusiasm, instruct bodhisattvas, bring bodhisattvas to fulfihnent; you desire the welfare of bodhisattvas,you have great compassion (Skt. karuṇā), you have equanimity towards all beings, possess the excellent perfection of complete mastery of the mind; possess the vision of the Buddhas, are great in vows, have the profound as your sphere of activity, aspire to omniscience (Skt. sarvajñatā), uphold awakening, teach the lineage of the Tathāgata, possess an aspiration to awakening (Skt. bodhicitta) like, similar, and comparable to vajra; are expert in the intent and behaviour of all beings, dwell in the presence of all Buddhas--Bhadrapāla, if one were to recount your good qualities, one would never come to an end.'
(2B) 'Bhadrapāla, there is a samādhi called "Direct Encounter with the Buddhas of the Present"; if one preserves that samādhi without forgetting it, if one listens to it attentively and succeeds in being mentally undistracted, then those excellent qualities will not be difficult to obtain.'Then the bodhisattva and mahāsattva Bhadrapāla said to the Lord:'Reverend Lord, would the Tathāgata therefore please expound that samādhi, which would be for the benefit of many beings, for the happiness of many beings, out of compassion for the world, and for the welfare, the benefit, and the happiness of the great body of beings, of devas and of humankind; and which would shed a great light for future bodhisattvas and mahāsattvas.'Then the Lord said to the bodhisattva and mahāsattva Bhadrapāla: 'In that case,Bhadrapāla, listen well and consider it carefully, and I shall expound it to you.'
(2C) Saying: 'So be it, Lord,' the bodhisattva and mahāsattva Bhadrapāla and the world with its devas, humans, asuras and gandharvas listened to the Lord, and the Lord then said:'Bhadrapāla, if one dharma is practised, cultivated, developed, frequently rehearsed, mastered, actively pursued, made to arise, made familiar, fully purified, fully concentrated on, and fully undertaken, then one will become distinguished by all good qualities.What is the the one dharma? Namely, the samādhi called "Direct Encounter with the Buddhas of the Present", which brings to fulfilment the dharrnas of which the first is great learning (Skt. bāhuśrutya).
(2D)1 'Bhadrapāla, what then is the samādhi called "Direct Encounter with the Buddhas of the Present"? Namely,(1) concentration (Skt. manasikāra) on thoughts which have the Buddha as their object; (2) absence of mental distraction; (3) obtaining mindful engagement and wisdom; (4) not renouncing vigour (Skt. vīrya); (5) attending on good friends (Skt. kalyāṇa-mitra); (6) practising, cultivating, and rehearsing emptiness (Skt. Sūnyatā); (7) elimination of the obscurations (Skt. āvaraṇa); (8) elimination of torpor and drowsiness; (9) avoidance of talk;(10) shunning bad friends; (11) keeping company with good friends; (12) undistracted faculties; (13) moderation in eating; (14) having the vigour not to sleep during the first or the last watch of the night; (15) absence of attachment to robes, food, beds and seats, medicine to cure the sick, and personal belongings; (16) not giving up living in the forest; (17) not attaching any importance to one's person; (18) disregarding one's own life; (19) self-sacrifice; (20) being of service to beings;
(2E) (21) renouncing kin; (22) keeping away from one's birthplace; (23) practising friendliness (Skt. maitrī); (24) obtaining compassion; (25) abiding in sympathetic joy (Skt. muditā); (26) developing disinterestedness (Skt. upekṣā); (27) elimination of the secondary defilements (Skt. upakleśa); (28) perfection of the trances (Skt. dhyāna) without indulgence in them; (29) meditational deconstruction (Skt. vibhāvanā) of the apperception (Skt. saṃjñā) of form; (30) acquiring the apperception of repulsiveness; (31) unwavering mindfulness (Skt. smṛti);(32) not grasping the aggregates (Skt. skandha); (33) absence of misconception (Skt. manyanā) with regard to the elements (Skt. dhātu); (34) being unattached to the sense-fields (Skt. āyatana); (35) not boasting of one's high birth; (36) eradication of pride; (37) being without envy of the possessions of others; (38) being a basis for the welfare of beings; (39) equanimity towards all beings; (40) not forsaking all beings; (41) emancipating all beings;
(2F) (42) apperception of all beings as onese1f; (43) apperception of all beings as one's mother; (44) apperception of them as one's father; (45) apperception of them as one's son; (46) apperception of them as one's kin; (47) perception of all beings as undefiled (Skt. niḥkleṣa);(48) not grasping at any existing things (Skt. bhāva? vastu?); (49) absence of undue attachment to morality (Skt. sīla); (50) cultivation of samādhi; (51) desiring great learning (Skt. bāhu-śrutya) yet not being made conceited by it; (52) flawlessness in the constituent of morality (Skt. sīla-skandha);(53) immovability in the constituent of samādhi; (54) not doubting the dharmas; (55) being in harmony with the Buddha; (56) not rejecting the Dharma; (57) not causing schism in the Sangha; (58) avoiding slanderous talk; (59) entering the presence of the Holy Ones (Skt. arya) and attending upon them; (60) shunning fools; (61) not enjoying, taking no pleasure in, and avoiding worldy (Skt. laukika) talk; (62) enjoying, taking pleasure in, liking, and employing talk which transcends the world (Skt. lokottara); (63) eliminating meaningless babble;
(2G) (64) practice of the six dharmas of agreeability; (65) pleasant speech; (66) elimination of the five obscurations (Skt. āvaraṇa); (67) practice of the five stages of emancipation (Skt. vimokṣāyatana); (68) comprehension of the five aggregates; (69) rejection of the ten unwholesome modes of action; (70) development of the ten wholesome modes of action; (71) perfection of the ten powers; (72) removal of the nine bases of ill-will (Skt. āghāta-vastu); (73) meditational cultivation (Skt. vibhāvanā) of the nine apperceptions;(74) elimination of the eight bases of sloth; (75) cultivation of the eight bases of exertion; (76) practice of the eight stages of sovereignty; (77) development of the eight emancipations (Skt. vimokṣā); (78) acquisition of the eight reflections of the Great Man (Skt. mahāpuruṣa); (79) harmony with the holy eightfold path;(80) non-attachment to trance; (81) absence of conceit in learning; (82) conquest of pride; (83) desire to hear the Dharma; (84) desire for the Dharma; (85) aspiration to the Dharma; (86) longing for the Dharma; (87) being bent upon the Dharma; (88) being intent upon the Dharma; (89) being inclined to the Dharma; (90) applying oneself to the Dharma;
(2H) (91) freedom from conceit due to the apperception of self; (92) rejection of the apperception of a being (Skt. sattva-saṃjñā); (93) not objectifying the apperception of a life; (94) elimination of the apperception of a person; (95) removal of the apperception of aggregates; (96) not abiding in the apperception of existents;(97) not desiring Nirvāṇa; (98) not desiring the aggregates; (99) apperception of transmigration (Skt. saṃsāra) as a dreadful horror; (100) apperception of the aggregates as executioners; (101) apperception of the elements as poisonous snakes; (102) apperception of the sense-fields (Skt. āyatana) as an empty village; (103) apperception of the Triple World as misery;(104) seeing Nirvāṇa as a blessing; (105) apperception of desires as something to be got rid of like a lump of phlegm; (106) apperception of food as disagreeable; (107) being intent on retiring from the world; (108) taking no pleasure in the household life; (109) perception of sons and daughters as one's enemies; (110) apperception of one's wife as a demoness;
(2I) (111) unbroken faith in the Buddha's teaching; (112) absence of antagonism towards all beings; (113) being of no fixed abode in all world-systems; (114) being face to face with all Buddhas; (115) being properly ordained and leading the holy life (Skt. brahma-carya) well;(116) understanding all bodies; 10 (117) purity of conviction (Skt. adhimukti); (118) virtuous resolve; (119) mental flexibility; (120) renunciation of improper endeavours; (121) engagement in proper endeavours; (122) removal of all signs (Skt. nimitta); (123) sameness of [attitude towards] the three times; (124) calling to mind all the Buddhas; (125) generation of all wholesome potentialities; (126) empowerment (Skt. adhiṣṭhāna) by all the Buddhas; (127) mastery of all samādhis;(128) non-attachment to the Buddha's bodily marks; (129) sameness of [attitude toward] all dharmas; (130) not disputing with the world; (131) not being averse to one's duties; (132) comprehension of conditioned production (Skt. pratītya-samutpāda); (133) acquisition of patient acceptance (Skt. kṣānti) of the stage of the Tathāgata on the road to deliverance;
(2J) (134) entrance to the dharma-realm (Skt. dharma-dhātu); (135) comprehension of the element of space (Skt. ākāśa-dhātu); (136) absence of fixation with regard to the realm of beings (Skt. sattva-dhātu), [and seeing it as] without production, cessation or duration;(137) direct realisation of the realm of Nirvāṇa; (138) purification of the eye of wisdom; (139) [realisation of the] non-duality of all dharmas; (140) aspiration to awakening which has no boundaries and no centre; (141) focussing of the mind (Skt. cetasa ekotībhāva?); (142) entrance into unobstructed cognition with[?] all the Buddhas; (143) cognition free of the obscurations; (144) ripeness of the mind for awakening; (145) independent cognition of a Buddha;(146) apperception of good friends as the Teacher; (147) not causing schisms among bodhisattvas; (148) rejection of the deeds of Mara; (149) [seeing] the similarity of all the world to an apparition; (150) [seeing] the similarity of the vision of the Tathāgatas to a reflection; (151) striving for the aspiration to awakening; (152) equanimity towards the perfections (Skt. pāramitā); (153) [seeing] the sameness of the vision of the Tathāgatas and perfect truth (Skt. bhūta-koṭi); (154) [seeing] the sameness for all Buddhas of all virtuous qualities--this, Bhadrapāla, is the samādhi called "Direct Encounter with the Buddhas of the Present".'Chapter Two of the Samadhi Enquired of by Bhadrapāla
(3A)'Bhadrapāla, since those dharmas will produce samādhi, what then, Bhadrapāla, is the samādhi which is produced by those dharmas? It is the samādhi called "Direct Encounter with the Buddhas of the Present.'"'And what, Bhadrapāla, is the samādhi called "Direct Encounter with the Buddhas of the Present"? In this regard, Bhadrapāla, any bhikṣus or bhikṣuṇīs, upāsakas or upāsikās who observe morality perfectly should go alone to a secluded spot, sit down, and think: "In which quarter does the Lord, the Tathāgata, Arhat and Perfectly Awakened One Amitāyus live, dwell, reside, and teach the Dharma?"In accordance with what they have learned they concentrate on the thought: "That Lord, the Tathāgata, Arhat and Perfectly Awakened One Amitāyus now resides, lives, dwells and teaches the Dharma, surrounded and attended on by a host of bodhisattvas, in the world-system of Sukhāvatī, one hundred thousand kotis of Buddha-fields to the west of this Buddha-field;" and they concentrate their thoughts on the Tathāgata with undistracted minds.'
(3B) 'For example, Bhadrapāla, some men or women in dreams while sleeping see various material forms, see silver, gold, friends, kinfolk, maternal relations, or companions that are pleasing, dear, and not disagreeable to them, and in those dreams they dream of playing, dallying, and amusing themselves with them, of speaking and conversing with them. When they wake up they relate to others all those things and people that they saw, heard, thought, were conscious of, spoke and conversed with; and they shed tears at recalling the things which appeared (Skt. nimitta) in their dreams. In the same way, Bhadrapāla, bodhisattvas, whether they be householders or renunciants, go alone to a secluded spot and sit down, and in accordance with what they have learned they concentrate their thoughts on the Tathāgata, Arhat and Perfectly Awakened One Amitāyus; flawless in the constituent of morality and unwavering in mindfulness they should concentrate their thoughts on him for one day and one night, or for two, or three, or four, or five, or six, or seven days and nights.If they concentrate their thoughts with undistracted minds on the Tathāgata Amitāyus for seven days and nights, then, when a full seven days and nights have elapsed, they see the Lord and Tathāgata Amitāyus.Should they not see that Lord during the daytime, then the Lord and Tathāgata Amitāyus will show his face to them in a dream while they are sleeping.'
(3C) 'For example, Bhadrapāla, women or men in dreams while sleeping neither know if they are at home nor know if they are elsewhere, and their faculty of sightis not obstructed by walls, nor is it darkened or obscured. In the same way, Bhadrapāla, those bodhisattvas and mahāsattvas too conceive a thought in such a way that the spaces between worlds do not obstruct them, that Sumeru, King of Mountains, the Cakravāḍa;la and the Greater Cakravāḍa, Kings of Mountains, and similarly the Black Mountains do not obstruct their faculty of sight; those bodhisattvas do not see the Tathāgata through obtaining divine vision, do not hear the True Dharma through obtaining the divine faculty of hearing, and do not travel instantaneously to that world-system through obtaining magic power, but while remammg in this very world-system, Bhadrapāla, those bodhisattvas see that Lord and Tathāgata Amitāyus, perceive themselves as being in that world-system, and also hear the Dharma.And they retain, master, and preserve those dharmas after hearing them expounded. They honour, revere, venerate and worship that Lord, the Tathāgata, Arhat and Perfectly Awakened One Amitāyus.And on emerging from that samādhi the bodhisattvas expound at length to others those dharmas, just as they have heard, retained, and mastered them.'
(3D) BAMPO TWO 'For example, Bhadrapāla, one man living in the great city of Rājagṛha heard that there was a courtesan in the city of vaiśālī called Sumanā; a second man heard that there was a courtesan called Āmrapālī; and a third man heard that there was a former courtesan called Utpalavarṇā.Having heard of them they fell in love with them, each with each; without those men ever having seen those courtesans, but just through hearing of their names, appearance, and beauty, they came to have lustful thoughts.While repeatedly thinking about them, they went to sleep, and in their dreams they perceived themselves as having visited those courtesans, so that, in accordance with the lustful thoughts which those men conceived while they were awake in the great city of Rajagrha, when they fell asleep those men dreamt in a dream that they saw those courtesans, consorted with them, indulged in sexual intercourse, and were relieved of their sexual desire.On waking up they remembered what they had experienced in their dreams, as they had seen, heard, known and perceived it, Bhadrapāla, and coming to you they related those things to you. Having heard those things you taught the Dharma to them by means of this very teaching, so that they would become unable to regress from supreme and perfect awakening.I too predicted that at a future time those men would become Tathāgatas, Arhats and Perfectly Awakened Ones under the name of *Suvibuddha.Although those men have attained patient acceptance (Skt. kṣānti), they still see and recall those former appearances.'
(3E) 'In the same manner, Bhadrapāla, bodhisattvas who possessed this samādhi of Direct Encounter with the Buddhas of the Present heard of the Lord, the Tathāgata, Arhat and Perfectly Awakened One Amitāyus, while they were in this very world-system. Having simply heard of that Tathāgata's name, appearance, and qualities, with undistracted thoughts they called to mind the Lord, the Tathāgata, Arhat and Perfectly Awakened One Amitāyus. By repeatedly concentrating on him they saw that Tathāgata. Established in the bodhisattvas' samādhi of Direct Encounter with the Buddhas of the Present, when they saw that Tathāgata, they asked the question: "Lord, what dharmas must bodhisattvas and mahāsattvas possess to be reborn in this world-system [of yours]?" In this way whenever one wishes to be reborn in any Buddha-field, one asks the Tathāgata[of that Buddha-field].'
(3F) 'Having been asked this question, the Lord and Tathāgata Amitāyus said to those bodhisattvas:"Sons of good family, if the calling to mind of the Buddha (Skt. buddhānusmṛti) is practised, cultivated, developed and rehearsed, then one is reborn in this world-system. If the calling to mind of the Buddha is practised, cultivated, developed and rehearsed, then one will be reborn in this Buddha field.What then, sons of good family, is the calling to mind of the Buddha? It is when one concentrates on the Tathāgata in this way: 'He, the Tathāgata, Arhat and Perfectly Awakened One, the Accomplished in Knowledge and Conduct, the Sugata, the Knower of the World, the Leader of All Men Capable of Conversion, the Supreme One, the Teacher of Devas and Humankind, the Buddha and Lord,9 endowed with the thirty-two marks of the Great Man and a body with a colour like gold, resembling a bright, shining, and well-set golden image, and well adorned like a bejewelled pillar, teaches the Dhanna in the midst of an assembly of sravakas, that is, teaches to the effect that nothing perishes.What does not perish? Earth does not perish. Water, fire, air, beings (Skt. bhūta), the devas, Brahmā and Prajapati do not perish. Fonn does not perish. Feelings, apperception, predispositions, and consciousness do not perish;'and one does not misconceive, does not objectify (Skt. upalabhyate), does not fixate on, does not falsely perceive, does not falsely imagine, does not falsely discriminate, and does not review the Tathāgata: 12 when in this way one obtains the samādhi of emptiness by concentrating on the Tathāgata without objectification, that is known as the calling to mind of the Buddha.'"
(3G) 'After they developed that samādhi and concentrated themselves in that samādhi, those bodhisattvas, when they emerged from that samādhi, came to you, Bhadrapāla, and told you about that samādhi. Then, Bhadrapāla, you taught the Dharma so that those bodhisattvas became unable to regress from supreme and perfect awakening. Then I also predicted that at a future time those men would become Tathāgatas, Arhats and Perfectly Awakened Ones under the name of *Prāptapratibhāna.''Bhadrapāla, you yourself, the Elder Mahākāśyapa, the bodhisattva Indradatta, the bodhisattva Susīma and, moreover, the bodhisattvas who have obtained this samādhi, have gained mastery from this samādhi.'
(3H) 'Bhadrapāla, fonnerly, in the past, a certain man travelled into a deserted wilderness, and having become hungry and thirsty was overcome by torpor and lethargy; he fell asleep, and in a dream obtained a great quantity of food and drink. On obtaining it he ate his fill, and his hunger and thirst vanished.When he awoke, neither his body nor his belly had grown any larger, and so he thought: "There exist certain dharmas which are so, that is, like a dream; understanding that to be so he obtained the patient acceptance of the fact that dharmas are not produced (Skt. anutpattika-dharma-kṣānti); and he also became unable to regress from supreme and perfect awakening.'In the same manner, Bhadrapāla, if bodhisattvas, whether they are householders or renunciants, hear that a Tathāgata resides in such and such a quarter, and concentrate their thoughts on the Tathāgata in that quarter, they will obtain a vision of the Buddha. They should not entertain the apperception of an existing thing, but should entertain the apperception of empty space; being properly established in the apperception of empty space, by concentrating their thoughts on the apperception of a Buddha, those bodhisattvas will see the Tathāgata face to face, beautiful and resembling an image of beryl; those bodhisattvas will see such a Tathāgata, Arhat and Perfectly Awakened One.'
(3I) 'For example, Bhadrapāla, a certain man travelled from his native land to another country, and arriving there he called to mind his native land; while concentrating his thoughts on things as he used to see, hear, know, and perceive them he was overcome by torpor and lethargy, and fell asleep; in a dream he travelled to his native land and perceived himself to be there, and he saw those things just as he formerly used to see, hear, discern and be aware of them; he went both to and from that place. Waking up, he reported those things in the company of his relatives, friends, kinsfolk, and maternal relations, saying:"Thus did I go, these things I saw, these things I experienced in that place.'"'In the same manner, Bhadrapāla, bodhisattvas, whether they are householders or renunciants, should, when they hear that a Tathāgata resides in such and such a quarter, concentrate on the Tathāgata in that quarter with mindfulness and undistracted thoughts, in order to obtain a vision of the Buddha. In that way those bodhisattvas will see the Tathāgata [like] a beautifully set up beryl image.
(3J) 'For example, Bhadrapāla, when a bhikṣu performing the meditation on the repulsive sees in front of him bloated corpses, when he sees in front of him corpses that have turned blue, that are putrefied, that are bloody, that are gnawed, that the flesh has peeled from, or that have no flesh or blood, or are white, or the colour of shells, or those that are skeletons, then those things-from the blue corpse to tJ1e skeleton--have not come from anywhere, nor have they gone anywhere. They are not made by anyone, nor are they made to cease by anyone, yet, Bhadrapāla, by that bhikṣu's mastery of mental focussing he sees the skeleton lying in front of him.''In the same manner, Bhadrapāla, whatever quarter Tathāgatas, Arhats and Perfectly Awakened Ones might dwell in, those bodhisattvas who are supported by the Buddha and established in this samādhi concentrate their minds on that quarter, in order to obtain a vision of the Buddhas. By concentrating their minds on that quarter they see the Tathāgatas, Arhats and Perfectly Awakened Ones in that quarter. Why is that? Namely, Bhadrapāla, this obtaining .Qf a vision of the Buddhas is the natural outcome of this samādhi. Bodhisattvas who are established in this samādhi see the Tathāgatas, and they appear to them, through the combination and concurrence of these three things: the might (Skt. anubhava) of the Buddha, the application of the force of their own wholesome potentialities, and the power [which is the result] of attaining samādhi.'
(3K) 'For example, Bhadrapāla, there are certain women or men with a natural bent for washing their hair and putting on jewellery, who might decide to look at themselves in a vessel of clear oil, or a vessel of clear water, or a wellpolished round mirror, or a patch of ground smeared with azurite. If they see therein their own forms, Bhadrapāla, what do you think? Does that appearance of the forms of the men or women in the vessel of clear oil, or vessel of clear water, or well-polished round mirror, or patch of ground smeared with azurite mean that there are men or women who have gone inside those things or entered them?'Bhadrapāla said: 'No, Reverend Lord, it does not. Rather, Reverend Lord, because the oil and water are clear and undisturbed, or the round mirror is highly polished, or the patch of earth smeared with azurite is clean, the reflections stand forth; the bodies of the men or women have not arisen from the water, oil, mirror, or patch of earth, they have not come from anywhere nor gone anywhere, they have not been produced from anywhere, nor have they disappeared anywhere.'
(3L) The Lord said: 'Well done, well done, Bhadrapāla! You have done well, Bhadrapāla. So it is, Bhadrapāla. As you have said, because the forms are good and clear the reflections appear.In the same manner, when those bodhisattvas have cultivated this samādhi properly, those Tathāgatas are seen by the bodhisattvas with little difficulty. Having seen them they ask questions, and are delighted by the answering of those questions.In thinking: "Did these Tathāgatas come from anywhere? Did I go anywhere?" they understand that the Tathāgatas did not come from anywhere. Having understood that their own bodies did not go anywhere either, they think: "Whatever belongs to this Triple World is nothing but thought. Why is that? It is because however I imagine things, that is how they appear."'
(3M) '"That thought is not apprehended as being inside, nor as being outside, nor as neither of the two, on the contrary, it is produced on the basis of objectification.That which is [in this way] produced conditionally (Skt. pratītya-samutpanna) has no substantial existence (Skt. abhāva). That which has no substantial existence is unborn. That which is unborn is not apprehensible as an object (Skt. anupalambha). That which is not apprehensible as an object is empty of essence (Skt. svabhāva-śūnya). That which is empty of essence is indefinable. That which is indefinable is unable to be seen, discerned, fixated upon, demonstrated, destroyed, or established."'
(3N)1 '"Thought creates the Buddha, thought itself sees him. Thought is the Buddha, thought the Tathāgata. Thought is my body, thought sees the Buddha. Thought cannot itself know thought, thought cannot itself see thought. Thought with [false] apperceptions is stupidity; thought without [false] apperceptions is Nirvāṇa. These dharmas lack anything enjoyable? They are all produced by thinking. Since thinking is empty, then whatever is thought is thus ultimately non-existent." Bhadrapāla, such is the vision of the bodhisattvas established in the samādhi.'
(3O) Then at that time the Lord uttered these verses:[1] "'By thought is the Buddha produced; And by thought alone is he seen. The Buddha is only thought for me, Thought alone is the Tathāgata.[2] Thought alone is my body, And the Buddha is seen by thought.Thought alone is my awakening; Thought itself is without essence (Skt. svabhava).[3] Thought does not know thought, Thought does not see thought.The apperception of thought is ignorance, The non-apperception of thought is Nirvāṇa.[4] These dharmas are insubstantial, They all arise from (mis)conception.Whatever is conceived with regard to emptiness, That conception is here empty."'Chapter Three of the Samadhi Enquired of by Bhadrapāla CHAPTER FOUR